Support implicit pre-read in Consensus Commit (#1222)
scalar-labs/scalardb: docs/api-guide.md

`Put` is an operation to put a record specified by a primary key. The operation behaves as an upsert operation for a record, in which the operation updates the record if the record exists or inserts the record if the record does not exist.

{% capture notice--info %}
**Note**

When you update an existing record, you need to read the record by using `Get` or `Scan` before using a `Put` operation.
{% endcapture %}

<div class="notice--info">{{ notice--info | markdownify }}</div>

> 

Reviewer: Just to confirm, do we need to remove this note from this doc on the version branches?

Author: No, the implicit pre-read feature will be supported starting from version `3.11`, so the note is still required for version `3.10` and earlier versions.

Reviewer: Understood. Thank you!

        .build();
```

> ##### Blind `Put` operation

Reviewer 2: In my current understanding, this new feature (blind write) seems to work as follows.

1. If `record A` exists and we run `put(record A)` **without** `blind()`, ScalarDB automatically reads `record A` to create the read set, and `put()` (i.e., UPDATE) will succeed.
2. If `record A` exists and we run `put(record A)` **with** `blind()`, ScalarDB returns a conflict error since there is no `record A` information on the read set.
   * This is the same behavior as current (v3) ScalarDB (i.e., same as `record A` exists and we run `put(record A)` without any `get()`/`scan()`, in current (v3) ScalarDB).
3. If `record A` does NOT exist and we run `put(record A)` **with** `blind()`, ScalarDB puts a new record without read operation (there is a performance benefit).
   * This is the same behavior as current (v3) ScalarDB (i.e., same as `record A` does NOT exist and we run `put(record A)`, in current (v3) ScalarDB).
4. If `record A` does NOT exist and we run `put(record A)` **without** `blind()`, ...

---

### Question 1

Regarding `1.`, `2.`, and `3.`, is my understanding correct?

---

### Question 2

What will happen in `4.`?
If it puts (INSERT) `record A` as a new record, what is the difference between `3.` and `4.`? (Does ScalarDB try to read the null/empty record in case of `4.`?)

Author: Note that, after some discussion, the `blind()` method is renamed to `disableImplicitPreRead()`.

For question 1, yes, your understanding is correct for `1.`, `2.`, and `3.`.

For question 2, in case of `4.`, ScalarDB tries to read record A, but it doesn't exist. So ScalarDB tries to put a new record without information from any existing record, which is the same behavior of `3.`. Therefore, the difference between `3.` and `4.` is whether or not ScalarDB tries to read the record.

Reviewer 2: I see. I understand!
Thank you for your explanation!

> If you're certain that a record you're trying to write doesn't exist, you can use a blind `Put` operation for better performance. A blind `Put` is faster than a regular `Put` as it doesn't read the record beforehand. However, if the record does exist, the operation will fail due to a conflict.

Reviewer 3: IIUC, the "blind write" feature in this PR is basically implicitly filling read-set if needed so that users don't need to manually read the target record in advance. But `com.scalar.db.api.PutBuilder.Buildable#blind()` is to skip the implicit read for insert operations. So it sounds a bit confusing to me. 

`com.scalar.db.api.PutBuilder.Buildable#create()`, `insert()`, `skipImplicitRead()` or something might be better instead of `com.scalar.db.api.PutBuilder.Buildable#blind()`?

Author: Good point. In this context, a `blind write` means preparing a record without having an existing record (in the read set). So when you set the `blind` option for the Put operation, we skip the implicit read. What are your thoughts on this?

Reviewer 3: Sounds good.

But, when I read the description of this PR, I thought "blind writes" meant implicit filling read-set. So, I still feel some inconsistency between the description and `com.scalar.db.api.PutBuilder.Buildable#blind()`.

> This PR adds support for blind writes in Consensus Commit. Specifically, if a record is in the write set but not in the read set, ScalarDB will read the record and add it to the read set before preparing the records internally.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the detailed explanation. I think we are on the same page.

I also agree to the ideas of `user-perspective blind writes` and `transaction-manager-perspective blind writes`.

> Maybe we don't need to modify the option name blind. And should I update the PR description instead?

Maybe it's related to how we want to appeal this feature to users. If we publicly call `user-perspective blind writes` "blind write", the `blind()` option might confuse users. Otherwise, the description and release note (`With this enhancement, users can execute blind writes without the need to read records prior to writing them.`) section should be updated to clearly describe "blind write" means `transaction-manager-perspective blind writes` (plus "We don't need in-advance reads anymore when you write a fixed value!"?).

I want to hear opinion from @feeblefakie as a product owner as well.

Author: I've updated the description (and the release notes) slightly. Maybe we should also update the PR title but I didn't for now. Can you please check the description and let me know if anything still seems confusing?

Reviewer 3: It looks good to me!

> If you're certain that a record you're trying to write doesn't exist, you can disable implicit pre-read for the `Put` operation for better performance. A `Put` without implicit pre-read is faster than a regular `Put` as it skips the implicit pre-read. However, if the record does exist, the operation will fail due to a conflict.

Reviewer 3: > If you're certain that a record you're trying to write doesn't exist, you can disable implicit pre-read for the `Put` operation for better performance.

This describes the implicit pre-read feature can be disabled. But there is no explanation in advance about what "implicit pre-read" is. How about adding a short description about "implicit pre-read" mechanism? It may be helpful for those who are interest in ScalarDB performance, but don't know implicit pre-read happens by default.

Author: Thank you for pointing that out. That's right. I've added a short description about "implicit pre-read" in a7c007146b5501822088b4e950449b551d357dd2. Please take a look! Thanks.

        .build();
```

##### Disable implicit pre-read for `Put` operations

> In Consensus Commit, write operations (`Put` and `Delete`) within a transaction require pre-reading the affected records to obtain the necessary information for the writes. If these records are not explicitly read during the transaction, ScalarDB performs an `implicit pre-read` of the records before committing the transaction.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In Consensus Commit, an application must read a record before mutating the record with `Put` and `Delete` operations to obtain the latest states of the record in case the record exists. If an application does not read the record explicitly in a transaction, ScalarDB reads the record on behalf of the application before committing the transaction. We call the feature `implicit pre-read`.
```

> If you're certain that a record you're trying to write doesn't exist, you can disable implicit pre-read for the `Put` operation for better performance. A `Put` without implicit pre-read is faster than a regular `Put` as it skips the implicit pre-read. However, if the record does exist, the operation will fail due to a conflict.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you are certain that a record you are trying to mutate does not exist, you can disable implicit pre-read for the `Put` operation for better performance. For example, if you load initial data, you can and should disable it. A `Put` without implicit pre-read is faster than a regular `Put` as it skips an unnecessary read. However, if the record exists, the operation will fail due to a conflict, i.e., ScalarDB thinks another transaction writes the record.
```

> If you are certain that a record you are trying to mutate does not exist, you can disable implicit pre-read for the `Put` operation for better performance. For example, if you load initial data, you can and should disable it. A `Put` without implicit pre-read is faster than a regular `Put` as it skips an unnecessary read. However, if the record exists, the operation will fail due to a conflict, i.e., ScalarDB thinks another transaction writes the record.

Author: Maybe it should be `another transaction wrote the record`? Or `another transaction has written the record`?

@feeblefakie What do you think?

> If you are certain that a record you are trying to mutate does not exist, you can disable implicit pre-read for the `Put` operation for better performance. For example, if you load initial data, you can and should disable it. A `Put` without implicit pre-read is faster than a regular `Put` as it skips an unnecessary read. However, if the record exists, the operation will fail due to a conflict, i.e., ScalarDB thinks another transaction writes the record.

Reviewer 4: @josh-wong @brfrn169 Yes, that's what I meant. Sorry!

> If you are certain that a record you are trying to mutate does not exist, you can disable implicit pre-read for the `Put` operation for better performance. For example, if you load initial data, you can and should disable it. A `Put` without implicit pre-read is faster than a regular `Put` as it skips an unnecessary read. However, if the record exists, the operation will fail due to a conflict, i.e., ScalarDB thinks another transaction writes the record.

Author: @josh-wong Applied your suggestions. Can you please take a quick look and approve if you are okay with them? Thanks.

> If you are certain that a record you are trying to mutate does not exist, you can disable implicit pre-read for the `Put` operation for better performance. For example, if you load initial data, you can and should disable it. A `Put` without implicit pre-read is faster than a regular `Put` as it skips an unnecessary read. However, if the record exists, the operation will fail due to a conflict, i.e., ScalarDB thinks another transaction writes the record.

Reviewer: @brfrn169 LGTM! Thank you!
